Who are coming to us
to talk about the year in review.
Following that, we'll have a 30-minute,
it'll probably be 25 minutes, with Wool Alliance for a
future-focused brief. So if you could bring them in, please.
You can come up to the table here, Barb.
Right. Let's see.
It's the man with the red coat. Cheers.
Good morning, Andy. Welcome to the Primary Production Committee.
Cheers.
We'll leave it in your hands. We're
probably going to get about
somewhere between 25 past and half past, have to
call it quits,
so-
Sorry, just repeat that.
Somewhere between 25 past and half past, we'll have to
get...
I'll ask you to finish so that-
Oh,
today we can. Okay.
Wool Alliance can come in.
We're not trying to squeeze two into one
No. No, no.
Okay.
No, no.
Okay. Understood.
So, just... Yeah, we'll lead it with you,
but
very happy to have you here and hear about how things are going
with Wool Impact. It's been a bit of a long journey, so
really interested to hear how it's going.
Great. Good morning. Good morning, all, and thank you for the opportunity to speak
to the committee this morning.
What a lot's happened in the last three and a half years, and it may seem
like a long time for you, but it's certainly gone very quickly for us.
So today is just an opportunity to reflect on what Wool
Impact's done over the last three years, but more importantly, to look to the
future and some of those key messages that were coming through.
So Wool Impact was established in July of 2022 as
a time-limited organization to help facilitate change
in the strong wool sector. And so this was after
many years of decline. So we were supported by the
five meat companies, and Woolworks,
match funded through the MPI Esther Wearitt Fund.
So the government contributed four and a half million.
We had six and a half million coming from the commercial sector.
The next screen, please.
So this report is a reflection of
the initiatives that we've undertaken over the last three
years through three key work streams.
Importantly, just to frame up, we've got around 100,000
tonnes of strong wool, which 85% of that is
being exported to around 30 countries around the world.
We're in a unique position that we probably represent about a quarter of
that strong wool that's actively traded.
But more importantly, we are representing around two-thirds of that
premium strong wool. So we've got the ability to reposition New
Zealand strong wool as a
high-quality product for principally going into
the interiors environment. It supports around
25,000 livelihoods, and it's an integral part of the
rural community. So our purpose as an organization was
to increase the demand and value for New Zealand strong wool.
So this report captures the high-level aspects
of the work that we've been undertaking. Next screen, please.
So over the last three and a half years, we've been working with 50 brands and
manufacturers directly engaged.
We've established 20 new international
relationships, and we've expanded the reach over eight
different product categories. And what's been really exciting is we're
seeing the expansion of that nonwoven category within New Zealand, and
that's leading to a whole portfolio of new products and
innovations that are coming through.
And then we're seeing the deconstructed fiber as a transformational
product.
And we have 30 domestic brands within our growth program.
If we could go back oneSo brands are the drivers
of demand,
but what we're seeing is that buyers are asking for much more specific
information, much more verifiable questions.
They're looking for traceability and transparency.
Increasingly, they're looking for direct supply, and
this is in response to the surety of supply, as we've
got a reduction in sheep numbers. They're looking for ways of locking in
what's available. Increasing need for accreditation
and the ability to tell stories around the provenance or
around that natural fiber story. Next, please.
So what we're seeing is there's no single trend, and this is a
convergence of regulations and procurements and standards.
A lot of it's driven by consumer requirements, but it's
also being driven by legislative requirements and
particularly out of the EU, where we're seeing a very strong
reporting and accountability of those European manufacturers.
So carbon,
as I said before, traceability and transparency.
We're looking towards nature positive as a further differentiator
for New Zealand wool and importantly, human health.
Next screen.
The New Zealand Farm Assurance program for wool was
initially stood up and funded by SWAG, which was the precursor
to Wool Impact. This is the first national accreditation
scheme for wool in the world and is something that our sector needs to
get behind and support. This is a
ticket to be able to compete effectively in a global market.
This is our way, our shorthand way of meeting the
changing demands of an international market.
So we need to get behind this. It's a platform for growth and
further differentiation. And as we look at the increasing demands,
it's a platform to enable us to build further
components to it, whether we're looking
at nature positive. But going through a gradated
offering, we can cater for a range of different marketplaces.
Next screen.
The world is waking up to the issues surrounding
microplastics and VOCs. Our
living spaces are
increasingly being contaminated by synthetic materials,
and indoor air pollution or indoor air quality is going to be a
driving change
as a requirement globally. It was interesting, I was in
China last year in September. They're actively monitoring the
indoor air quality of their commercial offices, looking at,
we would call it health and wellbeing.
They're looking at employee productivity.
So this is something that wool can play a very important role
in the quality of air and the purity of air and the environments that
we're living in.
In addition to China, China is our largest single market
at the moment with around 35% of our wool going there, but India
is a significant growth opportunity for us.
They're currently taking around 25%.
They have recently launched their 5F strategy.
Prime Minister Modi sees wool and textiles as their
pathway to growth and prosperity as a nation.
And so we need to embrace and
engage with the Indian market because they're putting billions
into building new textile facilities of which wool
is part of their national fiber mission.
So there are four fiber categories.
There is silk, jute, wool, and the fourth one is
synthetics. For us to be a part of their program
is really important. They're looking at increasing the amount of wool that they're
importing from 90,000 tons to 123,000
tons. So for us, we need to be a critical part of it.
Modi's not sitting still. He wants to grow their textile industry from
60 billion US dollars to 180 billion in the next five years.
So
he's got a job and we can help him do it.
So it's very exciting to see what's happened with the FTA agreement.
In addition to that, Indians are looking for
marketing and they're wanting, it's not just the ability for us to sell in, it's
the ability to sell through to help them grow and expand in global
markets by adopting the tools that we've been developing
back here in New Zealand. So the traceability, transparency, and the fiber
story. Next screen.
We've got to celebrate the announcement of the government policy.
Who's that guy?
He looks surprised.
What a great initiative. And look, this has given us great international
profile, particularly from the other wool-producing nations.
But there's a very strong underlying message.
This isn't done out of sympathy for growers.
This is around caring for occupants of government buildings.
It leads to improving domestic demand through our local manufacturers,
and in turn, driving demand for wool which increases the price for growers.
So look, it's a great initiative. Wool Impact has
been working with the manufacturers to create a database and to support
them in terms of the tendering opportunities.
We've also been working with some of the government departments, including MBIE, to
make it easy for them to procure wool, and we're looking at
education and training and regular reporting so we can
keep an eye on this and monitor the progress and help overcome some of
the challenges of transitioning to that.
So it's a great initiative, and that will be a key part
of helping drive domestic demand from, we're looking around
15,000 tons to our
goal of around 30,000 in the next five years.
Next screen.
So the result of all these activities is that we've seen
aA chart, a graph, that's in complete contrast to
what we presented at the beginning of or the middle of
2022. So this increase in
demand is the convergence of a whole lot of different initiatives and
activities. Yes, we acknowledge that there is a supply
shortage, but there's also
a whole lot of underlying activities being undertaken by our
brokers and our exporters to forge new relationships with
brands and companies around the world, supported by the
added value activities that we've been funding.
Next screen.
So the movement from 226 to 534 last
week,
it's an increase of 136%. So I look at
that, that's around $200 million extra a year coming into the
rural communities. From a government's point of view, your
$4.5 million investment in wool impact, I think
it's probably looking like quite a good return on investment.
So we thank you for that. But now is the time to act.
We've got a price point now which is profitable to growers.
We've got a situation where manufacturers have got a supply squeeze.
They can't get the wool that they used to, and they've always been able to live
hand to mouth. So now is the time for us to bring those two parties
together and look at what we can do to use this as an opportunity
to solidify the price point that we've got and use this as a platform
for long-term price stability so that we can maintain
sheep in our rural communities.
Last screen.
Look, I thank you for your collective support
because this is not aligned to just the coalition.
We've got all
parties have a vested interest in supporting our rural community, so very
grateful for the collective support that's been shown towards us,
and also to Minister Patterson and Damien O'Connor who
initiated this initial program. We're now in the situation with
this
impact report. We've got a deep pool of knowledge and
insights from international markets.
There is a broad range of opportunities
overseas if we choose to engage and
travel and invest in relationships overseas.
This depth of knowledge is something that will transition into the new
enduring organization, which Kara is going to speak about, but we're also
using it to engage with our brokers and exporters and
new industry organizations to support them in
integrating wool as a
product to the future. So I thank you for the opportunity to speak,
and welcome any questions.
Thank you very much. I'll start off, if you don't mind,
Andrew.
The biggest frustration as growers is the middle men in
between us and the market in the past who
have done very well at what we feel has been our expense
as part of your mandate to try
and shorten up that supply chain.
Our mandate is to increase in supply and demand,
and we're enacting that through engagement with brands.
Brands are the drivers of demand, and they are the ones that are dictating
as to how they choose to, or what types of wool, and how they
choose to transact. So,
there are different ways of approaching it, and if we can work with the
brands to help them find the most desirable pathway,
then that will work its own way through our system.
So question, you had up the slides on NZFAP,
and
now you're talking about the accreditation for farmers.
Is that the FAP plus or just the FAP
farm plans you're
covering?
Good question. So-
And I guess where I'm going is, are you looking...
I know Silver Fern Farms has an extra 10 cents a kilo for the
meat. Is there a premium being given to farmers for doing
that work,
investing the time and effort to get that accreditation?
So part of our drive is to
decommodify our strong wool clip.
Yeah.
And so let's remove that 100,000 and break it down into
its core components, and part of doing that is looking at the
accreditation program. So NZFAP is an entry level.
It's accommodating probably 95% of our growers.
So it's not a strong differentiator, it's an entry level program.
Yeah.
The FAP Gold is a significant
advancement on that, and
we need to make sure that that's aligned with the market drivers.
So whether it's measuring low carbon, whether it's looking at nature
positive or environmental impact, that is our
opportunity to segment certain growers who are attaining that level and
recognize and rewarding them through specific supply chain relationships.
Steve,
do you have a question?
How do you
make sure that
the whole industry isn't subject to another price drop?
What's the mechanism of keeping
price up? And it's sort of an extension on Miles's
point, because
not that long ago, it was absolutely critical.
Farmers couldn't afford to shear their sheep,
and now we're in a good place. But what's to stop us going back to that bad
place again?
And,
it's the uncertainty for the producers
... is
still too high, it seems to me. We need to move
past the boom and bust, right?
I would agree, yeah. And I think there's two parts to that.
One is grower education, making them aware of what the market's
looking for. They've got to understand how they're going to be
recognized and rewarded. Now we're developing these tools, these
programs in support of their product going overseas into
global markets. But I think in terms of how do we avoid
going through that boom-bust,
we don't have a supply issue, we have a demand issue.
The world's looking for solution to indoor air
quality problems, and so for us,
we have to embark on programs which is introducing and making it easy for
new brands to use wool, and to support those brands in expanding their
offerings so that they can cater for a larger market.
The work that we're undertaking overseas,
by aligning that with brands and making sure that New Zealand wool
can support the NZFAP plus
initiatives,
and we can sure that up in longer term supply
arrangements, that's going to bring stability and remove an element of
that. Our work with China and our work with India, two volume markets,
but they're also catering for Europe,
and the United States. So they are manufacturers catering for a
global market that's looking for increased traceability and
transparency.
Can I stop you? Yeah, so
when you
wake in the middle of the night, what's the bit you're worried about in terms of
that vision, which-
Sure
... sounds fantastic. What's the bit that makes you think where it could go
wrong?
Our need is to invest in
the capability
to engage with brands, international global brands,
to fulfill what their requirements are.
So they're giving very clear signals as to what they're after.
What we have to work on is that ability to execute
consistently to the standards that they're expecting.
Right.
The FAP Plus and the price difference between
FAP and FAP Plus,
will that grow large enough for farmers to go, "Hey, there's a premium
for
doing certain things,"
that will create a trend for more farmers to come in that direction?
Absolutely, and where we see one of the significant
opportunities is in the measurement of carbon.
So the
architectural market is one of the biggest users of carbon in the
world. We have the ability to provide
wool as a fiber that heals the world.
What was very exciting was Autex in Auckland, that makes wool
acoustic panels, was able to get an
EPD of minus 8.6 kgs of carbon.
That's a fiber that heals the world.
Now, for us to address the requirements of the
commercial offices market around the world by offering wool as
a solution is a great way of
reinforcing the value of FAP Plus, and the more
competition we get in that categorization, the more price
rewards the growers will get.
Excellent.
So,
the wool industry's been notorious for
undercutting each other and stabbing each other in the back, not working together.
And obviously you've got a big section of them working together now.
How do we keep that happening so that they don't
fragment like they have in the past?
Great question, and I think this is where under
Cara's banner, but I think the important is that we have a
collective shared vision, that there is an aspirational goal and
vision for what the sector could be if we work collectively
together, and that we can't afford to...
We've got to find new ways of conducting business that recognize and
reward growers and retain them. What we'd love to see is an increase in sheep
numbers across New Zealand, and so that has to be one of our
aspirational goals is to see this reversal improved.
Well,
yeah, well, I guess the
sheep industry in New Zealand's relied on a dual income for years up until
the last 15 years anyway, and
as a result, just relying on meat has seen the
sheep numbers plummet, hasn't it? So.
And that in itself is such an important point because
wool's 1% of the global fiber market, and we're still
treating it the same way that we did 40 years ago.
This is a
excuse me, this is a premium. This is a specialist product that needs to be
recognized and rewarded. We shouldn't be going head to head with synthetics.
This should be seen in the best hotels, auditoriums, best
homes. It's not for everyone. So let's position it
in the way that we do so well with all our other premium products, that this is a
specialist product that needs to be treated differently and reward the
growers for
it.
Susan.
Well, I'm proud to say that we're walking the talk here because aside from the
announcement with Kainga Ora, we also had the privilege of going with Mark and Todd
to the new Parliament building. Have you had an opportunity to look at that yet?
I haven't, not yet.
No, it's sensational, and that's all woollen insulation and woollen carpet
and wood, natural timber.
Nelson Timber, by the way.
Yes.
Done it. That's another good photo op. I'll send you a photo.
But it's really cool.
Hopefully it's Te Kawiti wool.
But, so do you think it's the
reduction in sheep numbers that has increased the price for
farmers? I have to declare, as a sheep farmer.
Oh.
Or is it also the demand for... 'Cause my
concern used to always be that these people that were trying to do
new innovative things with wool, it was fantastic, but
actually they were buying the raw product, the raw material they were purchasing,
the person that was producing that raw material was doing it at a loss.
Yeah.
So because for the last few years on our farm, it's been an animal health cost, it
hasn't been an income stream. So, do you think it's the
demand and the new innovation that's caused the increase in price, or in
actual fact, it's just the reduction in sheep numbers?
Looking at the reduction sheet is the most simplistic way of looking at it, but
it's much more complex than that. There's a convergence of a whole lot of
things happening. There's a growing awareness of the importance of wool, and you
only need to speak to people within New Zealand now.
The level of awareness over the last five years has increased significantly.
We've got significant growth domestically in terms of
new innovative products.
And so we're anticipating growth from around 15,000 tons at the
moment, up to between 30,000 and 40,000 tons in the next five years.
That's
new and additional demand that's going into value-added products,
particularly in that nonwoven category, and products with export
potential. So if we're looking at the government's aspiration to double
exports in the next 10 years, the wool sector has
the ability to be a significant
contributor towards that.
Mm-hmm.
So it's not just what's happening in the supply side.
And then internationally, because we've got relationships with brands over there,
they're intimating that there is growth opportunities there, recognizing
the impact on human health and environmental
impact of synthetics.
Well, I know your report talks about fire retardants too, because New Zealand wool
was on Artemis, wasn't it? The rocket.
Correct, yes.
Yeah, with the face masks.
Because those guys came and spoke to us a while ago too, didn't they?
Mm-hmm.
And it must be that high-tech stuff which is going to increase the value, and the
paint,
whatever it-
Segments
Segments, yes. The transformation.
And look,
I can't list a whole range of companies here, but there is
such a range of really diverse companies doing cool things with wool,
whether it's acoustics, whether it's bedding products, filtration systems,
there's personal hygiene,
there's horticultural products.
These are companies that weren't around five years ago.
Or even bags and blankets, like in my electric with Honest
Wool,
Runui Station. Yeah, no, it's amazing.
So it's very exciting. So we're using our own initiative to
solve problems domestically, but they've got export
potential.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you for what you're doing. It's awesome.
Yeah.
If we could move over to Cara now, and then
we'll question her and possibly
at the end, there might be questions that
we throw it back at you as well.
Yeah.
Thanks, Cara.
And that's why we're here together, isn't it?
Because we both can answer questions as well from Wool Alliance
as well.
Thank you as well for having me here today. I'm Cara Biggs.
I'm the General Manager of Campaign for Wool New Zealand.
I'm not here to talk about Campaign for Wool today, though.
I'm here to talk about the Wool Alliance.
Now, the Wool Alliance is a collaboration of four
industry organizations. There's us, Campaign for Wool, Wool Impact,
there's Wool Research Organization of New Zealand, otherwise known as WRONZ, and
there's also Beef and Lamb as well.
We're chaired by independent chair, John Monahan.
And for those of you who are not aware of John, he
was the former chair of Fonterra.
John knows a thing or two about sector transformation, which is what we're trying
to do now, so we're very lucky to have him.
The job of the Wool Alliance is to deliver an
industry model to drive greater value for New
Zealand wool. So this is a complete segue from the work
that Wool Impact is doing, and it's about taking that work and moving it into a
new industry
sector organization.
So today, I just want to quickly take you through a few slides.
I'll be giving you a very high-level look.
I imagine that you'll get back with questions at the end of this, but I'll flick
through it reasonably quickly, and then we can get onto the interesting bit, which
is the Q&A.
So the next slide, please.
It's great to have good news for wool.
As Andy said, the slide deck a while
ago was trending down. These days, it's trending up.
So that's really good. We've seen farm gate prices increase
from last year, 60%. We're on 56% as of
yesterday on the Fosker Index.
From a modeling perspective,
we think we can get from
$550 million
export to over a billion. We do have some
calculations to back that up, and I'll talk about that shortly.
Domestic manufacturing, as Andy talked about, it is growing, and
I'll come onto that shortly as well.
But essentially shifting that sort of, if we're looking at the graph on the
right-hand side, shifting that big dark blue piece, and sort
of changing the mix, if you like, so that we can get higher value.
And we are seeing progress across the sector.
Andy talked about the
procurement policy, the Kainga Ora.
There's been a lot of work happening in government.
But we've also got
wool going to the moon. We've got
all the market work that Andy and his team have been doing with Wool Impact.
Campaign for Wool has launched four new education programs in the
last three years, so we're really starting to talk to those future users.
You look at PGG Wrightson, Wooles of New Zealand, they're consolidating
together. There's a lot of change happening there.
Even New Zealand Merino rebranding to Zanterra.
There's a lot of change, and change is good.
Can be uncomfortable for some, but actually what we need in the wool industry is
change to move forward.
So you might be asking,
if wool's going in the right direction, actually, you did pretty much ask this,
Steve, didn't you? If wool's going in the right direction, how do we actually keep
it going in the right direction, and what else needs to be done?
So we do still have some problems that need to be fixed within the wool
industry.
What a consolidated wool industry needs to do is to
deliver this sector unificationWe also need
to lead our wool story development. Andy's team has started that.
A new sector organization needs to continue to develop that over the next
few years. We need to enable sales optionality.
We talked about giving growers the right information so that they can actually make
the right decisions. It's not about removing channels or sales channels from the
mix. It's about how do we enable the mix to be as profitable as
possible for our growers.
We need to educate and train. Now, we've done a lot of work out in the industry
around
where the gaps are, and on-farm training is a gap that we have
seen that we need to
fill. That comes from growers, that comes from industry, those
conversations.
We do need to centralize consistent funding. We're being funded in one way.
Wool Impact's being funded another way.
All sorts of other organizations are being funded in other ways.
Again, let's consolidate that so that we can use that funding efficiently
and make sure that it goes a little bit further, a lot further.
We talked about sheep numbers. So number six there, responding to sector
decline and land use change.
Miles, you talked about dual revenue stream. We need to get back there.
That's a simple fact. And so to do that, we need to do all this other stuff so that
our sheep can be that dual revenue stream again.
And then finally, wool doesn't work just in isolation.
Aside from meat and wool being on the same animal,
it's actually a wider picture than that as well.
It's our rural communities, it's our national agenda, all of that sort of
stuff.
So going on to the next slide, what does this mean?
So the Wool Alliance was set up, as I said before, with four
industry organizations coming together
under one roof to ensure a new enduring entity for
wool. The reason I've put a little box around
Campaign for Wool and Wool Impact is that we are coming
together. We will be one unit. We're working on that
imminently. We're not quite sure exactly how that's going to shape up, but we do
know that we're coming together as one
unit. So that's really positive. But it's more than just the
four organizations that you can see on the screen.
We are in the middle of our second round of stakeholder engagement
across industry. We have spoken to brokers, to
merchants, to scour, to dump, to
exporters. We're part of the future
of Fiber Aotearoa. So making sure that we're actually looking at not just
wool, but also across the sector as well.
So this collaboration, yes, it's four organizations, but it's actually bigger than
that. We're going out there and we're asking our industry and we're asking our
growers, "Okay, what do you need from an enduring entity?" It's not
about us saying, "This is what we think we need and get on board or not." It's
let's actually develop this together.
So how do we do that? What's the purpose of the new entity?
So the purpose is about enabling and advancing the value growth
of New Zealand wool.
This is a non-transactional, or it will be a non-transactional organization.
We're not talking single desk or anything like that.
It's about making sure that all of, well, there's two parts to this,
foundational work and there's in-market work.
Andy's just
talked to you about the in-market work and all the stuff that needs to happen
out in market.
Market access, research, data, creating opportunities, that sort of
thing. This foundational piece of work is all the stuff that I said that we're
actually still missing. That is going to keep
those prices high and make sure
that we're actually enabling others to be more profitable across the sector.
So if we can get these two big pieces of work right, our
goal is to increase the total value of New Zealand wool
to one billion by 2032.
Now, that is an ambitious goal. We do think it is
achievable, though. It's not just something we plucked out of thin air.
If we go to the next slide,
there's a lot of
modeling that's happened behind this, and I have to call out Ross Macisaac from
Wool Impact, who's done an awful lot of work around modeling this.
But essentially I did just unashamedly steal this
graph from Andy's impact report from Wool Impact's impact report.
This kind of answers your question, Suz, around
where does that growth come from. Because what you see in the
blue, the bottom of that bar chart, those are just
our core product manufacturing. So that's your
carpets, your furniture, your bedding, okay?
That will continue to grow.
We know that. It's been modeled.
But the bit that's really going to help us transform this sector is
around these adjacent and transformational
manufacturing. Adjacent being the acoustics, the
geotextiles, the insulation, that sort of stuff, and the
transformational stuff being the pigments and powders, the work that Wool Source is
doing,
the filters going to the moon, all of that sort of stuff, which is super
high value, probably less volume.
Well, pigments and powders might be more in the
future.
But that's where you really start to see that exponential growth.
So from the modeling that's been done, we think that one billion is
ambitious, but it is achievable.
Okay, so onto the next slide, we're looking at, so we've
got our purpose in place. We know where we want to get to.
How are we going to get there? So what we've created is a three pillar
strategy. I'm not going to go, there's a lot of detail that sits under this.
What I'd like you guys to pick out is the value dial piece at the
bottom. And the reason I want you to pick that out is that this is
where we really start to make a difference.
Everything that we are doing, we're taking every dollar that we
are hoping to get, and we're going to be trying to turn
that into value for the industrySo, the
first area is on farms. So we're talking fibre, flock, and
farm. Making sure we've got the right fibres coming out of
farms, making sure it's fit for purpose.
We want to get some training in there around wool harvesting
capability, environmental performance, animal welfare standards, making
sure that we're actually creating a fibre that the market
needs. So looking at that value dial, it's about building
consistent and relevant fibre supply base.
And that's not just by quality, it's also by volume as
well. So we're looking at both things at the same time.
We're enabling the lift of both things at the same time.
The second piece is around unlocking demand.
A lot of that is the work that Andy's just talked about here, but it's also about
building new uses and new users. So that's a lot of the work that Campaign for
Wool does as well around education, academically up into tertiary
level, but also
capability as well in building training.
The value dial for that is around delivering credibility,
innovation and higher value markets for products
and for the fibre itself.
And the third piece is what I was talking around before, around sector
stewardship. That's around bringing the wool industry together, and it's
also about, and you touched on this, Andy, recruiting and retaining
people into the sector. We really do need to get
these young people into the sector, and they want to be part of it, and they're the
ones who are the future of the wool industry.
The value dial there is to centralise, and what that does is it
creates cost and resource efficiencies.
It doesn't mean that everything gets centralised into one body, but it does
mean that we have an industry organisation for New Zealand wool.
The next slide is around the model itself, and I'm not going to go into the detail
of this, but just to explain it. So in the middle is the why.
This is why we exist, and as I said, to enable and advance the
sustained growth of the New Zealand wool sector.
The next piece is around the buckets of work that this
organisation will do. So whether it's standards and certification,
R&D, communication, market enablement, education, that is all
the buckets of work that need to be done by an industry organization.
And I do just want to call out that there's a lot of good work happening already.
You've heard from Andy, Campaign for Wool is doing a lot of work in education.
We've got Rons doing a lot of work in R&D.
So there's a lot of work that needs to be done, that we're working collaboratively
to continue. And then on the outside are some of the tactics
that we'll be looking at. And as I said, there's a lot of detail that sits behind
this. You're welcome to ask any questions at the end of this to
explain further. What we're trying to do is to create a future-fit,
cross-functional working model.
So just to touch on how this is going to look on the next slide.
So we've talked about Campaign for Wool and Wool Impact coming
together to work for New Zealand Wool together.
There will be a central wool organization to implement the model and the
strategy that you've just seen. Wool research will be part of this
and they will work on R&D as they have, and they
will be working under a strategic partnership that will be a formal
strategic partnership with New Zealand Wool.
Beef and Lamb on the other side, they will be providing shared services.
So that's about cost reduction as well.
Four funding lines. We've been told by
growers, "Don't take more than you need," and I agree with that.
So it's like we have figured that $5 million can get us going for the next
five years. We're looking for multiple funding lines, that's
across growers, matched by industry.
The government has said to us, or NPI has said to us that, look, if we get
growers and industry on board, that they are
interested in supporting us as well.
And also we've got a grant section as well, which is around grants for education.
The next slide is just to say that, again, that this is bigger than just
wool. If we create a thriving wool
industry, we're going to be delivering wider benefits for New Zealand as well.
New Zealand is a heritage industry and we need to continue
that. It needs to form part of the wider value model for New Zealand.
And the final slide is really just
to let you know what we're hoping for today from you, which is around,
we would love to see
your engagement in this. We would love to hear from you, hear your genuine
feedback, we want challenges.
And we really would love endorsement of the work that we're doing.
If you do endorse it, we really would love to hear your endorsement.
We know you're out there talking to people and to say, "Hey,
we'd love you to listen to these guys going forward." So
thank you very much.
We'll head to questions, and we can
answer those.
Thanks, Cara. We'll go to Suz and then to Steve.
Sorry, I'm going to be a little bit of a, not a cynic, but so is this sort of
the wool board mark two that you're proposing?
No,
it's not, but it's a challenge that we have had.
There's actually a lot of good stuff that the wool board did do around
market access and all that sort of thing.
They did some really good things that we've looked at and
that we've taken and gone, "Absolutely, we need to be doing that
stuff."
What we've heard about the wool board in the past is that the
transparency and visibility and accountability
wasn't too strong, or at least wasn't strong enough for what growers were
expecting and what the industry was expecting.
That's the bit that we absolutely need to get right for this, and I didn't mean to
in the presentation , but being lean and being transparent and
being accountable is critical for the work that we're doing.
Okay. I'll just have a quick sec. So in the fibre flock and farm bit that
you talked about, theDo
you think we need those sorts of things because of the higher
end uses for wool? Or I just wonder if you're overthinking it.
A lot of this stuff is happening without these steps in
motion.
It's happening now. The industry's growing and progressing, and we've
shown that the
people are doing amazing innovative things. What value is that? Are you over...
I'm just worried about adding a layer of bureaucracy or a layer of costs that are
not necessary.
Yep, that's a very good-
Or a tick box exercise, a box exercise for farmers.
Yep. I hear you on that. That's another thing that we've heard from growers is,
"Please don't make us do more." This is where
FAP and FAP Plus is really important.
But I guess the piece that I would challenge slightly is that I don't think we do
know exactly what we're growing. What we hear is
that
growers need education or they
would like education on their test cert, what they're growing,
how do they actually create a fiber that's fit for
purpose for what the market needs.
So we need to go out into market and go, "Okay, this is what the market needs for
certain products," bring that back to farm and say, "Hey, farmer, you are growing
X, Y, Z because of what your test certificate says.
This is how you can increase,
get a better color or decrease VM," or whatever it might be.
And then that can actually help them create a fit for purpose
fiber.
But doesn't that come from the market itself?
So they go to a grower, depending on what that
company is producing. So I gather it would be very different for the guy making the
face masks going to the moon than for someone making carpet.
Mm.
So does it need to be everybody? Doesn't that actually get driven by the, "This
is what we need you to produce." So Honest Wool for just using coarse wool for
their bags, nobody needs to tick a box or fill out a form for that.
They just use certain micron of wool.
But I
get what you're saying. I'm just-
Devil's advocate, are you?
... doubting it. I'm just playing devil's advocate.
Yeah. No, that's fair.
Because I'm a wool farmer, and I don't...
Yeah. We fill out enough forms and tick enough boxes that if you just-
We've got a collective responsibility.
A lot of the growers don't know what the market wants because they don't even know
where the wool goes. It leaves the farm gate-
Yeah.
Yeah
... on a strong wool, and they don't know which country, which product, which
brand.
No.
Mm.
Now, we're wanting to move to a brand driven approach.
Yeah.
And that requires a different level of insight and behavioral change.
And that's educating and raising awareness of growers of the activities
that they can undertake in support of those brands.
So
it may seem unnecessary, but we've got to change.
We've got to break from the status quo and create a new
model. And this isn't a Wool Board 2.0.
This is a new approach. It's digital, it's market focused.
Mm-hmm.
And we will be working and engaging with growers in a very different way.
And just to add,
sorry, just to add to that, it is about making sure that the information from
market actually gets all the way through to growers, and it's about having access
to that. Growers actually don't have anywhere to go at the
moment to find that information. So that's part of the
work that we're doing as well.
So we've got a sup from Rachel.
Just to sup on that because you talked about that
understanding where the wool goes.
Have you actually got a plan in terms of tech and AI and
there are ways you can actually track that, and consumers are often quite
interested as well, in being able to see from,
say farm to plate, but it's farm to
product and actually seeing that whole supply chain and where things have come
from.
It works with Merino-
Yeah
... already.
Yeah.
But we haven't had Woolworths strong word of value where people
have pushed it. But it will be a need to have.
Europe's going to introduce a natural fiber traceability requirement next year.
Right.
So
it's the future.
Yeah.
So we need to embrace it.
And it's where's the ability to invest in that, right?
So do you have the resource to be able to do the investment and the tech and things
that are needed?
It's about building partnerships and collaboration with
existing... There are entities and organizations that
already have that capability.
Mm-hmm.
It's a matter of this new organization being able to plug and play with the
right participants.
Cool. Nice.
So yeah, the sup.
Just on that funding side of things, with the
5 million coming from growers, is that a levy?
Are we looking at,
what's our little
act we have for-
Commodity Levies Act
... is that, yes, sorry. Are we looking at that?
Are we looking at a vote or how are you planning for that?
Good question. First thing is, is that the 5 million comes from multiple sources,
and so what we're looking for is essentially a third, a third, a third,
or at least a third, a third from growers and
industry.
Oh, so... Yeah.
To your question, is that right?
Yeah, on the growers. Yeah.
Yeah. So coming back to growers,
yes is the short answer. We are looking to run a
levy campaign,
and that would sit under the Commodity Levies Act.
Yeah.
The industry portion would be a voluntary contribution because that
cannot sit under the CLA, as you know.
So the work that we're doing at the moment is trying to figure out exactly how much
funding comes from each, and so we're in the middle of doing some research at the
moment,
where we are talking to a selection of growers, through
quantitative research to find out, okay, where is their threshold?
Is it 2 cents? Is it 5 cents? What is it per
kilogram,
that they feel that they would like to contribute?
And then we can figure out how does that work back into the model.
But at the moment, we're working off from our calculations.
We're working off about 2 cents per kg.
So going forward, say that's successful,
at some point in time
You would need to transport...
The government doesn't fund any other commodity levy group.
Mm-hmm.
So at some point in time, all your other parts of the primary sector
would be going, "Hang on, why aren't we getting..." So it would need to transfer,
wouldn't it?
Yes.
I guess the intent, I'm assuming, to get it
embedded in growers' minds, see the value, and then
transition?
Correct. So
essentially, this strategy that we've just shown you is-
Thanks, Sarah.
Thank you. The strategy that we've just shown you is
a six-year strategy essentially until, or five-year
strategy until the next
Commodity Levies Act.
Yeah.
No, sorry. The next levy five.
Order. Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah. And you'll probably succeed because now you've got a dairy farmer in charge.
Steve's got a question.
Before my primary, I did have a sup, and Andrew asked the first part of it.
But the second part of it is, why is the single desk concept
spoken about in such disparaging terms?
It's not disparaging, but there are two parts
to it. Firstly, we have spoken to
Minister Maclay about this, and he said that there wouldn't be any
legislation to put that in place-
Mm
... for the wool industry, which is fair.
But the other side to it is that I think
the
single desk would be a very expensive exercise.
Mm.
To actually set it up would be really expensive.
If you didn't get it right or you didn't have the capital, it could
easily end up taking us backwards or exacerbating
the problems at the moment, or at least keeping it
as a status quo. So what we're looking for is
a different model where we actually enable the current
players to
be more profitable with what they're already doing, rather than trying to take
control and trying to do it all ourselves.
I think that would really feel like another board, another Wool Board 2.0.
So really our job is to help others do better rather than actually just
grab it all.
And my primary is, you mentioned animal welfare.
In terms of the broader vision of a
high-value product going to niche users,
how important is that
being ahead of the game in terms of demonstrating that we have high animal
welfare? And
what are the specific issues that you're concerned
about now? I know
when I see
intensive winter grazing down in Southland and
hundreds of thousands of
lambs going to the slink factory,
it just is not a good look.
We've got rid of mulesing.
There's still some questions around how we might do docking better, but
where's the focus on making sure
that we are really demonstrating that we're constantly
improving in that animal welfare space in terms of making sure that
lambs and sheep have a good life?
Yeah.
First answer is that we know that animal welfare is
critical,
and I don't think any of us would argue with that.
Animal welfare is critical not just for wool, but actually for New Zealand as a
whole-
Mm-hmm
... because we've
got to keep our image intact.
Mm.
So absolutely critical.
The second part is around what's our plan.
Is that the second part to your question?
Yeah.
The plan
for that specific piece has not been formulated yet, but we
know that there's a lot of work that's happening out there at the moment that we
then need to collaborate. It comes under this collaboration piece.
So we have a strategy. We know that animal welfare, it needs to be in there, which
it is, but the
plan for that needs to be worked with in conjunction with those who are already
working in the industry. We spoke to the New Zealand Marine, Zanterra
yesterday, for example, about...
And animal welfare came up as a big thing around the pettah and the shearing and
all that sort of thing, and actually how, as an industry organization, do we make
sure that
what needs to be done actually gets done for wool?
Mm.
Yeah, that's...
Yeah. Thank you.
Education side of things.
The committee's collapsed anyway because we had limited-
Yes
... but so we'll just carry on asking you questions if that's all right.
Please do.
So,
a few years back-
You know we have
... we had very limited capability in our tertiary institutions.
Mm.
Or,
well, particularly Lincoln, Massey,
in
teaching and
next generation, I suppose.
How are we addressing that? Because that's a real concern for me, because that
technical stuff
and
that knowledge,
we've got it just, but it's disappearing.
These people aren't getting any younger.
Can I quantify which part of tertiary
education you're talking about?
Well, so for example, ag degrees. You used to
have a portion of your ag degree was
in wool technology.
Mm-hmm.
And it wasn't just on farm
classing and what have you around, there was also the
technical stuff that was more sciencey.
Mm-hmm.
But it sort of slipped out of the curriculum a little
bit,
mainly due to the fact that we don't have the capabilities that we once
had.
Yeah.
That both universities, their wool technology
sectors have shrunk significantly.How do we
address that?
Yeah. It is a good question. So the reason I asked for quantification is that
Campaign for Wool's done some work with creating courses for
architecture and product design, so that's about the innovation piece.
Mm.
Just wanted to make sure that we were talking about agri.
So,
you're absolutely right, we need to get that back into
the curriculum or into the course material for our tertiary
institutions. Part of that is going to come from
the, if you remember the model with the standards and certifications.
Mm.
So part of that is making sure that actually we've got
certified wool classes, we've got certified wool
handlers, we've got trained
handlers, we've got a register of shearers, all of that sort of
stuff that then,
once that becomes commercial, once we can actually get the
shearing
team to only bring in shearers,
for example, who have been trained and certified,
only bring in wool classes who actually have their certificates and all those
sorts of things. Suddenly it becomes like, gosh, if I want to work in the wool
industry, I've actually got to get these qualifications back here.
So there's a big job to do to bring people into the industry, but then we need to
get them qualified, and then that qualification needs to turn into a better
salary for them in the future. So it's a big job to do,
but that's sort of how we think the process will work.
What about the science side?
The real
scientists that were at the universities that
had a focus on wool
fiber and then all the various components of it
who just we don't have them anymore.
There
might be a couple floating around, but there used to be dozens.
Yeah. There did used to be dozens. Like I said, there's a big job to do.
It depends what you're talking about with science, though, because if we're looking
for...
So there's the biotech side of things.
So if we're developing scientists, getting their BScs and all those
sorts of things,
and we need them to work with bioproducts.
We're unlikely to say, "Hey, look, go and think about wool." It's like, okay, let's
think about bio-based
fiber or whatever it might be, bio-based products.
And then those scientists will actually use wool as one of
their research tools.
Then there's the other side of it, which is if you're a product designer,
you need to understand the science of it to be able to create your products.
So therefore, we need to make sure that we've actually got the right science
happening.
Thank you. That we've got the right science happening
at the back end as well. Part of this remit is
that R&D segment of the model, and that will be run by Rons.
And Rons will have under their strategic agreement, they
will have an agreement to do science alongside
the new organization. So that's their piece
for current science. But you're right, we need to bring in future
scientists as well.
I would hope that Rons still intends to be
allied with the universities, with Lincoln in particular, because that's where it
is at the moment.
It's-